— Eh bien, mon prince. Genes et Lucques ne sont plus que des apanages, des estates, de la famille Buonaparte. Nes les atrocites deon, je vous previens, que si vous ne me dites pas, que nous avons la guerre, si vous vous permettez encore de pallier toutes les infamies, tout cet Antichrist (ma parole, j'y Crois) — je ne vous Connais plus, Vous n'etes plus mon AMI, vous n'etes plus my faithful slave, Comme Vous dites.[1] Well, Hello, Hello. Je vois que je vous fais peur,[2] sit down and talk to me.
So said the famous Anna Pavlovna Scherer, a lady-in-waiting and confidant of the Empress Maria Feodorovna, in July 1805, when she met the important and official Prince Vasily, who was the first to arrive for her evening. Anna Pavlovna coughed for several days, she had the flu, as she said (flu was a new word then, used only by rare people). In the notes sent out in the morning by the red footman, it was written without distinction in all:
"Si vous n'avez rien de mieux a faire, M. le comte (or mon prince), et si la perspective de passer la soiree chez une pauvre malade ne vous effraye pas trop, je serai charmee de vous voir chez moi entre 7 et 10 heures. Annette Scherer».[3]
— Dieu, quelle virulente sortie![4] - answered, not at all disconcerted by such a meeting, the Prince entered, in a court, embroidered uniform, in stockings, shoes, and stars, with a bright expression of a flat face.
He spoke in that refined French which our grandfathers not only spoke, but also thought, and with that quiet, patronizing intonation which is characteristic of a man who has grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, offered her his perfumed and shining bald head, and sat down quietly on the sofa.
— Avant tout dites moi, comment vous allez, chere amie?[5] Calm me down — " he said, without changing his voice, and in a tone in which, because of decency and concern, indifference and even mockery shone through.
- How you can be healthy... when do you suffer morally? Is it possible, having a feeling, to remain calm in our time?  Anna Pavlovna said. "You've been with me all evening, I hope—"
 It's midday now. I must show myself there — " said the Prince. "My daughter will pick me up and drive me.
— I thought this holiday was canceled." Je vous avoue que toutes ces fetes et tous ces feux d’artifice commencent a devenir insipides.[6]
— If we had known that you wanted this, we would have canceled the holiday, " said the Prince, out of habit, like a wound-up clock, saying things that he did not want to be believed.
— Ne me tourmentez pas. Eh bien, qu’a-t-on decide par rapport a la depeche de Novosilzoff? Vous savez tout. [7]
- How can I tell you?  the Prince said in a cold, bored tone. — Qu’a-t-on decide? On a decide que Buonaparte a brule ses vaisseaux, et je crois que nous sommes en train de bruler les notres.[8] —
Prince Vasili always spoke lazily, as an actor speaks the part of an old play. Anna Pavlovna Scherer, on the other hand, was full of animation and impulses, despite her forty years.
Being an enthusiast became her social position, and sometimes, when she didn't even want to, she became an enthusiast, so as not to deceive the expectations of people who knew her. The reserved smile that constantly played on Anna Pavlovna's face, though it did not go with her obsolete features, expressed, like those of spoiled children, a constant consciousness of her own dear defect, from which she did not want, could not, and did not find it necessary to correct.
In the middle of a conversation about political actions, Anna Pavlovna became heated.
"Oh, don't tell me about Austria! I don't understand anything, maybe, but Austria never wanted and doesn't want war. She's betraying us. Russia alone should be the Savior of Europe. Our benefactor knows his high calling and will be faithful to it. Here's one thing I believe in. Our good and wonderful sovereign has the greatest role in the world to play, and he is so virtuous and good that God will not leave him, and he will fulfill his calling to crush the Hydra of the revolution, which is now even more terrible in the person of this murderer and villain. We alone must redeem the blood of the righteous. Who can we hope for, I ask you?.. England, with her commercial spirit, will not and cannot understand the full height of the soul of the Emperor Alexander. It refused to clear Malta. She wants to see, she's looking for a back thought to our actions. What did they say to Novosiltsov?.. Nothing. They do not understand, they cannot understand, the self-sacrifice of our Emperor, who wants nothing for himself and wants everything for the good of the world. And what did they promise? Nothing. And what you promised, and that will not happen! Prussia had already declared that Bonaparte was invincible, and that all Europe could do nothing against him... And I don't believe a word of either Gardenberg or Haugwitz. Cette fameuse neutralite prussienne, ce n’est qu’un piege.[9] I believe in one God and in the high destiny of our dear Emperor. He will save Europe! " she stopped suddenly, with a smile of mockery at her own vehemence.
— I think, "said the Prince, smiling," that if you had been sent instead of our dear Winzengerode, you would have taken the consent of the Prussian king by storm. You are so eloquent. Will you give me some tea?
— Now. A propos — "she added, calming down again —" I have two very interesting people to-day, le vicomte de Mortemart, il est allie aux Montmorency par les Rohans, [10] one of the best names in France. This is one of the good emigrants, from the real ones. And then l'abbe Morio: [11] do you know this deep mind? He was received by the sovereign. Do you know?
"Ah! I shall be very glad, " said the Prince. "Tell me," he added, as if he had just remembered something, and especially carelessly, when what he asked was the main purpose of his visit, " is it true that l'imperatrice-mere wishes to appoint Baron Funke first Secretary in Vienna?" C'est un pauvre sire, ce baron, a ce qu'il parait. [13] — Prince Vasily wanted to appoint his son to this position, which they tried to deliver to the Baron through the Empress Maria Feodorovna.
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes as a sign that neither she nor anyone else could judge what the Empress liked or liked.
"Monsieur le baron de Funke a ete recommande a l'imperatrice-mere par sa soeur," she only said in a sad, dry tone. While Anna Pavlovna named the Empress, her face suddenly presented a deep and sincere expression of devotion and respect, combined with the sadness that happened to her every time she mentioned her high patroness in conversation. She said that her Majesty had deigned to give Baron Funke a beaucoup d'estime, [15] and again her eyes were sad.
The Prince fell silent indifferently. Anna Pavlovna, with her usual courtly and feminine dexterity and quickness of tact, wanted to rebuke the Prince for daring to speak so highly of the person recommended to the Empress, and at the same time to console him.
"Mais a propos de votre famille," she said, " do you know that your daughter has been fait les delices de tout le monde since she left?" On la trouve belle, comme le jour.[17]
The Prince bowed in respect and appreciation.
"I often think," continued Anna Pavlovna, after a moment's silence, drawing nearer to the Prince and smiling affectionately at him, as if to show that political and social conversations were over and that a cordial conversation was now beginning: "I often think how the happiness of life is sometimes unfairly distributed. Why did fate give you such two nice children (with the exception of Anatole, your youngest, I don't like him — " she put in peremptorily, raising her eyebrows) — such lovely children? And you, really, value them the least, and therefore do not steal them.
And she smiled at his enthusiastic smile.
— Que voulez-vous? Lafater aurait dit que je n'ai pas la bosse de la paternite, [18] " said the Prince.
"Stop joking. I wanted to have a serious talk with you. You know, I'm not happy with your younger son. Between you and me "(her face assumed a sad expression), " they have spoken of him at her Majesty's and pity you...
the Prince did not answer, but she waited in silence, looking significantly at him, for an answer. Prince Vasili grimaced.
— What should I do?"  he said at last. — You know, I have done all that a father can for their education, and both have come out des Imbeciles. [19] Hippolyte, at least, is a dead fool, and Anatole is a restless one. Here's one difference, " he said, smiling more unnaturally and animatedly than usual, and at the same time showing especially sharply in the lines that had formed around his mouth something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.
— And why would people like you have children?" If you were not my father, I could not reproach you with anything, " said Anna Pavlovna, raising her eyes thoughtfully.
— Je suie votre[20] a faithful servant, a vous seule et puis je l avouer. My children-ce sont les entraves de mon existence. [21] This is my cross. That's how I explain it to myself. Que voulez vous? ... [22] - He paused, expressing with a gesture his submission to a cruel fate.
Anna Pavlovna pondered.
— You never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole. They say, "she said," that old maids are ont la manie des mariages. [23] I do not yet feel this weakness behind me, but I have one petite personne,[24] who is very unhappy with her father, une parente a nous, une princesse[25] Bolkonskaya.  Prince Vasili did not answer, although with the quickness of thought and memory characteristic of men of the world, he indicated by a movement of his head that he had taken this information into consideration.
"No, do you know that this Anatole makes me 40,000 a year," he said, apparently unable to restrain the sad train of his thoughts. He paused.
— What will happen in five years if it goes like this? Voila l’avantage d’etre pere.[26] Is she rich, your Princess?
"My father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the village. You know, this famous Prince Bolkonsky, who was retired under the late Emperor and called the "king of Prussia". He's a very smart man, but he's weird and heavy. La pauvre petite est malheureuse, comme les pierres.[27] she Has a brother who recently married Lise Meynen, Kutuzov's adjutant. I'll have him tonight.
"Ecoutez, chere Annette," said the Prince, suddenly taking his companion by the hand and bending her down